drafting deletion PEP (#4080)
python/peps: peps/pep-0763.rst

PEP: 763
Title: Limiting deletions on PyPI
Author: William Woodruff <william@yossarian.net>,
        Alexis Challande <alexis.challande@trailofbits.com>
Sponsor: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
PEP-Delegate: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging

> Created: 07-Oct-2024

Reviewer: One last thing :)  This is the PEP number assignment date.
```suggestion
Created: 24-Oct-2024
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

  This resulted in widespread disruption for users, who (prior
  to the relicensing) were downloading PySimpleGui
  approximately 25,000 times a day. This deletion also impeded efforts
  by the community to provide "continuity" projects, as the
  permissively-licensed artifacts were no longer available for reference
  and re-uploading.

In addition to their disruptive effect on downstreams, deletions
also have detrimental effects on PyPI's sustainability as well as the overall
security of the ecosystem:

* Deletions increase support workload for PyPI's administrators and
  moderators, as users mistakenly file support requests believing that PyPI
  is broken, or that the administrators themselves have removed the
  project.

* Deletions impair incident response and external analysis, making it
  difficult to distinguish "good faith" maintainer behavior from malicious
  post-exploitation track-covering.

The Python ecosystem is continuing to grow,
meaning that future deletions of projects can be reasonably assumed to
be *just, as if not more,* disruptive than the deletions sampled above.

Given the above, this PEP concludes that deletions

> now presents a greater risk and detriment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
now present a greater risk and detriment
```

to the Python ecosystem than a benefit.

Specification
=============

There are three different types of deletable objects:

1. **Files**, which are individual project distributions (such as source
   distributions or wheels).

   Example: ``requests-2.32.3-py3-none-any.whl``.

2. **Versions**, which contain one or more files that share the same version.

   Example: `requests v2.32.3 <https://pypi.org/project/requests/2.32.3/>`_.

3. **Projects**, which contain one or more versions.

   Example: `requests <https://pypi.org/project/requests>`_.

This PEP proposes the following *deletion eligibility rules*:

* A **file** is deletable if and only if it was uploaded to
  PyPI less than 72 hours from the current time, **or** if it
  has a :ref:`pre-release specifier <packaging:version-specifiers>`.
* A **release** is deletable if and only if all of its
  contained files are deletable.

> * A **project** is deletable if all of its releases are deletable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A **project** is deletable if and only if all of its releases are deletable.
```
The previous bullet points use "if and only if".

Security Implications
=====================

This PEP does not identify any positive or negative security implications
associated with proposed approach.

How To Teach This
=================

This PEP suggests at least two pieces of public-facing material to help
the larger Python packaging community (and its downstream consumers)
understand its changes:

* An announcement post on the `PyPI blog <https://blog.pypi.org>`_ explaining
  the nature of the PEP and its behavioral implications for PyPI.
* Updates to the `PyPI user documentation <https://docs.pypi.org/>`_ explaining
  the difference between deletion and yanking and the limited conditions under
  which the former can still be initiated by package owners.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Conditioning deletion on dependency relationships
-------------------------------------------------

An alternative to time-based deletion windows is deletion eligibility based on
downstream dependents. For example, a release could be considered deletable
if and only if it has fewer than ``N`` downstream dependents on PyPI,
where ``N`` could be as low as 1.

This idea is appealing since it directly links deletion eligibility to

> disruptiveness. `NPM <https://www.npmjs.com/>`_ uses it and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
disruptiveness. `npm <https://www.npmjs.com/>`_ uses it and
```

conditions project removal on the absence of any downstream dependencies
known to the index.

Despite its appeal, this PEP identifies several disadvantages and technical
limitations that make dependency-conditioned deletion not appropriate
for PyPI:

1. *PyPI is not aware of dependency relationships.* In Python packaging,
   both project builds *and* metadata generation are frequently dynamic
   operations, involving arbitrary project-specified code. This is typified
   by source distributions containing ``setup.py`` scripts, where the execution
   of ``setup.py`` is responsible for computing the set of dependencies
   encoded in the project's metadata.

>    This is in marked contrast to ecosystems like NPM and Rust's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This is in marked contrast to ecosystems like npm and Rust's
```

   `crates <https://crates.io/>`_, where project *builds* can be dynamic but
   the project's metadata itself is static.

   As a result of this, `PyPI doesn't know your project's dependencies
   <https://dustingram.com/articles/2018/03/05/why-pypi-doesnt-know-dependencies/>`_,
   and is architecturally incapable of knowing them without either running
   arbitrary code (a significant security risk) or performing a long-tail
   deprecation of ``setup.py``-based builds in favor of :pep:`517` and
   :pep:`621`-style static metadata.

2. *Results in an unintuitive permissions model.* Dependency-conditioned
   deletion results in a "reversed" power relationship, where anybody
   who introduces a dependency on a project can prevent that project from
   being deleted.

   This is reasonable on face value, but can be abused to produce unexpected
   and undesirable (in the context of enabling some deletions) outcomes.

>    A notable example of this is NPM's
>    `everything package <https://www.npmjs.com/package/everything>`_, which
>    depends on every public package on NPM (as of 30-Dec-2023) and thereby

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A notable example of this is npm's
   `everything package <https://www.npmjs.com/package/everything>`_, which
   depends on every public package on npm (as of 30 Dec 2023) and thereby
```

   prevents their deletion.

Conditioning deletion on download count
---------------------------------------

Another alternative to time-based deletion windows is to delete based on the
number of downloads. For example, a release could be considered deletable if
and only if it has fewer than ``N`` downloads during the last period.

While presenting advantages by tying a project deletion possibility to its
usage, this PEP identifies several limitations to this approach:

1. *Ecosystem diversity.* The Python ecosystem includes projects with widely
   varying usage patterns. A fixed download threshold would not adequately account
   for niche but critical projects with naturally low download counts.

2. *Time sensitivity.* Download counts do not necessarily reflect a project's
   current status or importance. A previously popular project might have low
   recent downloads but still be crucial for maintaining older systems.

3. *Technical complexity.* Accessing the download count of a project within
   PyPI is not straightforward, and there is limited possibility to gather a

>    project download statistics from mirrors or other distributions systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   project's download statistics from mirrors or other distributions systems.
```

PEP: 763
Title: Limiting deletions on PyPI
Author: William Woodruff <william@yossarian.net>,
        Alexis Challande <alexis.challande@trailofbits.com>
Sponsor: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
PEP-Delegate: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>

> Discussions-To: TODO

Reviewer 3: To have lint checks pass
```suggestion
```

Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 07-Oct-2024

> Post-History: `09-Jul-2022 <https://discuss.python.org/t/stop-allowing-deleting-things-from-pypi/17227>`__,
>               `01-Oct-2024 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pre-pep-limiting-deletions-on-pypi/66351>`__

Reviewer 3: line length
```suggestion
Post-History: `09-Jul-2022 <https://discuss.python.org/t/17227>`__,
              `01-Oct-2024 <https://discuss.python.org/t/66351>`__
```

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes limiting user-level deletions of projects (including release
and file-level deletions) on PyPI, in favor of the "yanking" mechanism
adopted by PyPI with :pep:`592`.

> In particular, the PEP proposes a time-based deletion criterion via

Reviewer 4: This sentence reads a bit awkwardly to me. Perhaps clarify or break into 2 sentences.

> This PEP proposes limiting user-level deletions of projects (including release
> and file-level deletions) on PyPI, in favor of the "yanking" mechanism
> adopted by PyPI with :pep:`592`.
> 
> In particular, the PEP proposes a time-based deletion criterion via
> which projects (and their releases and files) are protected from *deletion*
> after an initial grace period of 72 hours following their creation.
> An exception to this criteria is made for versions and files that are
> marked with :ref:`pre-release specifiers <packaging:version-specifiers>`,
> which will remain deletable at all times.
> 
> This PEP does not propose changes to administrator-initiated deletions, e.g.
> for moderation or security purposes.

Reviewer 3: I got a bit lost if this meant projects only (so individual files/releases could be deleted), so this is a proposed re-wording -- though feel free to reject/adapt.
```suggestion
We propose limiting when users can delete files, releases, and projects
from PyPI. A project, release, or file may only be deleted within 72 hours
of when it is uploaded to the index. From this point, users may only use
the "yank" mechanism specified by :pep:`592`.

An exception to this restriction is made for releases and files that are
marked with :ref:`pre-release specifiers <packaging:version-specifiers>`,
which will remain deletable at any time.
The PyPI administrators will retain the ability to delete files, releases,
and projects at any time, for example for moderation or security purposes.
```

Author: Thank you, that's a lot clearer! Your interpretation was correct.

Rationale and Motivation
========================

As observed in :pep:`592`, user-level deletion of projects on PyPI

> enables a `Catch-22 <https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/catch-22>`_
> of dependency breakage:

Reviewer 3: This is a common idiom, the link serves to distract more than it aids.
```suggestion
enables a catch-22 situation of dependency breakage:
```

Author: My co-author @DarkaMaul didn't know it, hence the link. So I want to note that it might not be as common to non-L1 English speakers, but no objection to dropping it 🙂

    Whenever a project detects that a particular release on PyPI might be
    broken, they oftentimes will want to prevent further users from
    inadvertently using that version. However, the obvious solution of
    deleting the existing file from a repository will break users who have

>     followed best practices and pinned to a specific version of the project.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   pinned to a specific version of the project.
```

Reviewer 4: There are cases where library authors will let versions float so let's remove the "best practices" phrase.

Author: FWIW, this is a direct quote from PEP 592. Do you want me to rephrase the quote and mark it as paraphrased, or is it okay to do a blockquote with unattributed paraphrasing here?

>     This leaves projects in a catch-22 situation where new projects may be pulling
>     down this known broken version, but if they do anything to prevent that they’ll
>     break projects that are already using it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    This leaves a project author in a catch-22 situation where other projects may be pulling
    down this known broken version, but if the project author does anything to prevent that, it
    breaks projects where the dependency has been pinned for use.
```

Author: Same as https://github.com/python/peps/pull/4080/files#r1817037637 -- I like this rephrasing but I don't know whether it's kosher to rewrite a direct quote 😅

  breakage for many of Codecov's CI/CD users, who were unaware of the
  deprecation period due to limited observability of deprecation warnings
  within CI/CD logs.

  The project was
  `subsequently re-created <https://about.codecov.io/blog/message-regarding-the-pypi-package/>`_
  by its maintainers, with a new release published to compensate for the deleted releases
  (which were not restored), meaning that any pinned installations remained
  broken. As of October 2024, this single release remains the only release on
  PyPI and has around
  `1.5 million monthly downloads <https://pypistats.org/packages/codecov>`_.

* June 2023: `python-sonarqube-api <https://pypi.org/project/python-sonarqube-api/>`_
  deleted all released versions prior to 2.0.2, which was both a breaking
  change version *and* was accompanied by a paid "Professional Edition".

  The project's maintainer subsequently
  `deleted conversations <https://discuss.python.org/t/stop-allowing-deleting-things-from-pypi/17227/114>`_
  and force-pushed over the tag history for ``python-sonarqube-api``'s source repository,
  impeding efforts by the community to compare changes between versions

>   and obtain previous, permissively-licensed versions.

Reviewer 3: Is the 'paid "Professional Edition"' relevant here? Whilst this isn't great behaviour, the main point is more that older releases were deleted from the index, rather than that other methods of getting the older files were also removed. It does seem a bit harsh to single out individual cases like this in a PEP.

Reviewer 4: I would remove the sonarqube examples. You have established a need with the other examples.

Author: Yeah, that's strictly not relevant. I can rephrase to emphasize the actual bits that matter (i.e. the deletion itself).

> * June 2024: `PySimpleGUI <https://pypi.org/project/PySimpleGUI/>`_ changed
>   licenses from LGPL to a commercial license, and deleted
>   `nearly all previous versions <https://discuss.python.org/t/48790/27>`_.
>   This resulted in widespread disruption for users, who (prior
>   to the relicensing) were downloading PySimpleGui
>   approximately 25,000 times a day. This deletion also impeded efforts
>   by the community to provide "continuity" projects, as the
>   permissively-licensed artifacts were no longer available for reference
>   and re-uploading.

Reviewer 3: The suggestion is for consistent capitalisation, but as above, perhaps there's a way we can re-word this -- no one has an obligation to provide *free* software, so changing to a commercial licence isn't inherently a bad thing, which a couple of these examples seem to imply. Again perhaps it would be better simply to focus on the disruption caused downstream, without warning, &c &c.

```suggestion
* June 2024: `PySimpleGUI <https://pypi.org/project/PySimpleGUI/>`_ changed
  licenses from LGPL to a commercial license, and deleted
  `nearly all previous versions <https://discuss.python.org/t/48790/27>`_.
  This resulted in widespread disruption for users, who (prior
  to the relicensing) were downloading PySimpleGUI
  approximately 25,000 times a day. This deletion also impeded efforts
  by the community to provide "continuity" projects, as the
  permissively-licensed artifacts were no longer available for reference
  and re-uploading.
```

> In addition to their disruptive effect on downstreams, deletions
> also have deleterious effects on PyPI's sustainability as well as the overall
> security of the ecosystem:

Reviewer 3: "deleterious" is a bit much even for me...

Could we add a bit more on how deletions have negative effects on the Python ecosystem's *security*? I was surprised to read this, as deleting a project/release (one expects) would simply lead to failure in resolution. The bullet below mentions "incident response", but that's post-hoc -- what is the ex-ante security impact?

```suggestion
In addition to their disruptive effect on downstreams, deletions
also have detrimental effects on PyPI's sustainability as well as the overall
security of the ecosystem:
```

> * Deletions raise the baseline support load for PyPI's administrators and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Deletions increase support workload for PyPI's administrators and
```

  moderators, as users mistakenly file support requests believing that PyPI
  is broken, or that the administrators themselves have removed the
  project.

> * Deletions impair incident response and external analysis, making it

Reviewer 4: This needs more detail. Incident response by PyPI or others? External analysis?

Author: Yep, I was thinking external analysis here. This goes to @JelleZijlstra's comment about security impacts as well, so I'll round this out.

  difficult to distinguish "good faith" maintainer behavior from malicious
  post-exploitation track-covering.

> The size and interdependency of the Python ecosystem is continuing to grow,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Python ecosystem is continuing to grow,
```

meaning that future deletions of projects can be reasonably assumed to

> be *just as if not more* disruptive than the deletions sampled above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
be *just, as if not more,* disruptive than the deletions sampled above.
```

> Given the above, this PEP concludes that the availability of "hard" deletions
> versus "soft" deletions (i.e. yanking) now presents more of a risk and detriment

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Given the above, this PEP concludes that deletions
now presents a greater risk and detriment
```

> to the Python ecosystem than a benefit.

Reviewer 3: This is the first mention of "soft deletions" -- perhaps just use "yank(ing)" as that's a specified term?

Specification
=============

> This PEP identifies 3 different types of deletable objects:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are three different types of deletable objects:
```

1. **Files**, which are individual project distributions (such as source
   distributions or wheels).

   Example: ``requests-2.32.3-py3-none-any.whl``.

2. **Versions**, which contain one or more files that share the same version.

>    Example: `requests v2.32.3 <https://pypi.org/project/requests/2.32.3/>`_.

Reviewer 3: Elsewhere you've said "release" to mean "version", would it be possible to either use both terms here or standardise elsewhere?

Author: Thanks -- I'll unify on "release," since that's what PyPI and packaging more generally calls them.

3. **Projects**, which contain one or more versions.

   Example: `requests <https://pypi.org/project/requests>`_.

> This PEP proposes the following *deletion eligibility rules*:

Reviewer 4: Perhaps add a subsection titled Deletion Eligibility Rules

> * A **file** is considered deletable if and only if it was uploaded to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* A **file** is deletable if and only if it was uploaded to
```

  PyPI less than 72 hours from the current time, **or** if it
  has a :ref:`pre-release specifier <packaging:version-specifiers>`.

> * A **release** is considered deletable if and only if all of its

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* A **release** is deletable if and only if all of its
```

>   constituent files are deletable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  contained files are deletable.
```

> * A **project** is considered deletable if and only if all of its
>   constituent releases are deletable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* A **project** is deletable if all of its releases are deletable.
```

> These rules are intentionally "telescoping": they allow new projects to be

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
These rules allow new projects to be
```

deleted entirely, and allow old projects to delete new files or releases,
but do not allow old projects to delete old files or releases.

This is intended to strike a balance between competing interests: brand new
projects are unlikely to have significant community uptake and thus pose a
minimal disruptive risk, while established projects (of any size)
are more likely to have a "tail" of adopted versions. Their downstream users
are not necessarily equipped to address the sudden deletion

> of a version, file, or the whole project.

Reviewer 4: I'm not convinced that this is needed. By this point, the PEP already has made the case that the change is needed. This feels like one is still trying to convince that it is needed.

Implementation
==============

This PEP's implementation primarily concerns aspects of PyPI that are not
standardized or subject to standardization, such as the web interface and
signed-in user operations. As a result, this section describes its
implementation in behavioral terms.

Changes
-------

* Per the eligibility rules above, PyPI will reject web interface requests
  (using an appropriate HTTP response code of its choosing) for
  file, release, or project deletion if the respective object is not
  eligible for deletion.
* PyPI will amend its web interface to indicate a file/release/project's
  deletion ineligibility, e.g. by styling the relevant UI elements as "inactive"
  and making relevant bottoms/forms unclickable.

Security Implications
=====================

This PEP does not identify any positive or negative security implications

> associated with proposed approach.

Reviewer 3: Given above we discuss security implications of *permitting* deletions, I would expect that the security implications are *this PEP makes things better* (but also see my comment above).

Reviewer 2: A possible negative implication is that it may be harder to stop users from downloading a file that has security issues, right?

Author: Thanks! Yeah, I need to qualify this: the positive implication above was that external users of the index (e.g. companies) benefit from limiting deletion because it makes post-compromise triage and remediation simpler, since the attacker can't remove their trail as easily. I wasn't sure whether to put that under this section though, since it's an indirect/fuzzy security implication, but I'll work it in for further discussion.

> A possible negative implication is that it may be harder to stop users from downloading a file that has security issues, right?

@JelleZijlstra Could you elaborate a bit on what you're thinking here? This PEP doesn't stipulate any changes to PyPI admins' abilities to delete things, so the existing malware reporting and quarantining flows remain in place. So from my perspective this doesn't make it any harder to halt downloads of malicious packages.

OTOH, maybe you're thinking of packages that aren't malicious but just have security issues? For those I think the pre-existing "yank" mechanism is good enough (and is what people already use in practice), but I could add in some qualifications there if you think the PEP would benefit from it!

Reviewer 2: Currently, if a package maintainer discovers that there is malware in a package they released, they can delete the package. With this PEP's proposal, they'd have to instead wait for PyPI admins to get to it, which may take longer.

Example scenario: I am a maintainer of https://pypi.org/project/black/. I discover (e.g., through private disclosure) that one of the compiled wheels of the latest release contains malicious code due to a backdoor in cibuildwheel/GH Actions/mypyc (pretty outlandish scenarios, but bear with me). Right now, the first thing I would do is go to PyPI and delete the malicious wheel. With this PEP's proposal, I'd have to figure out the right channels to raise the issue to the PyPI admins, and possibly wait for some time.

This is not a common scenario and your answer could well be that the tradeoff is worth it, but it doesn't seem impossible.

Author: Gotcha, thanks for elaborating! That's an interesting case -- I can see the argument that it represents a slightly worse security posture, since there's now a middleman (PyPI's admins) for malware response.

I think my position is that it's "worth it," especially now that PyPI has a dedicated malware reporting flow (see screencap) as well as project "quarantine" support for temporarily suspending a project's downloads without actually deleting it. But I'll make sure to include that in a revision to fairly characterize this PEP's changes.

<img width="361" alt="Screenshot 2024-10-28 at 12 10 53 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8114b805-34fb-42f1-a617-0db463902a57">

Reviewer 2: Thanks, that position makes sense to me!

How To Teach This
=================

This PEP suggests at least two pieces of public-facing material to help
the larger Python packaging community (and its downstream consumers)
understand its changes:

* An announcement post on the `PyPI blog <https://blog.pypi.org>`_ explaining
  the nature of the PEP and its behavioral implications for PyPI.
* Updates to the `PyPI user documentation <https://docs.pypi.org/>`_ explaining
  the difference between deletion and yanking and the limited conditions under

>   which the former can still be initiated by package owners.

Reviewer 3: At least initially, it might be useful to have something "in your face" (e.g. an announcement banner?) -- most developers releasing packages won't read the PEPs, or Discourse, or the PyPI blog -- and may be surprised to learn that their ability to delete files is restricted. This is especially the case given that (I contend) uploads largely happen without using/signing in to the PyPI website -- they're via CI or the CLI.

You probably intend to do this, but it might be worth mentioning that the aforementioned blog posts will contain the motivation behind this change.

downstream dependents. For example, a release could be considered deletable
if and only if it has fewer than ``N`` downstream dependents on PyPI,
where ``N`` could be as low as 1.

This idea is appealing since it directly links deletion eligibility to
disruptiveness. `NPM <https://www.npmjs.com/>`_ uses it and
conditions project removal on the absence of any downstream dependencies
known to the index.

Despite its appeal, this PEP identifies several disadvantages and technical
limitations that make dependency-conditioned deletion not appropriate
for PyPI:

1. *PyPI is not aware of dependency relationships.* In Python packaging,
   both project builds *and* metadata generation are frequently dynamic
   operations, involving arbitrary project-specified code. This is typified
   by source distributions containing ``setup.py`` scripts, where the execution
   of ``setup.py`` is responsible for computing the set of dependencies
   encoded in the project's metadata.

   This is in marked contrast to ecosystems like NPM and Rust's
   `crates <https://crates.io/>`_, where project *builds* can be dynamic but
   the project's metadata itself is static.

>    As a result of this,
>    `PyPI doesn't know your project's dependencies <https://dustingram.com/articles/2018/03/05/why-pypi-doesnt-know-dependencies/>`_,

Reviewer 3: FYI -- you can split these links over multiple lines, if you'd like, the following should work:

```suggestion
   As a result of this, `PyPI doesn't know your project's dependencies
   <https://dustingram.com/articles/2018/03/05/why-pypi-doesnt-know-dependencies/>`_,
```

Author: TIL, thanks!

   deprecation of ``setup.py``-based builds in favor of :pep:`517` and
   :pep:`621`-style static metadata.

2. *Results in an unintuitive permissions model.* Dependency-conditioned
   deletion results in a "reversed" power relationship, where anybody
   who introduces a dependency on a project can prevent that project from
   being deleted.

   This is reasonable on face value, but can be abused to produce unexpected
   and undesirable (in the context of enabling some deletions) outcomes.
   A notable example of this is NPM's
   `everything package <https://www.npmjs.com/package/everything>`_, which
   depends on every public package on NPM (as of 30-Dec-2023) and thereby
   prevents their deletion.

Conditioning deletion on download count
---------------------------------------

Another alternative to time-based deletion windows is to delete based on the
number of downloads. For example, a release could be considered deletable if
and only if it has fewer than ``N`` downloads during the last period.

While presenting advantages by tying a project deletion possibility to its
usage, this PEP identifies several limitations to this approach:

> 1. *Ecosystem diversity.* The Python ecosystem includes projects with widely
> varying usage patterns. A fixed download threshold would not adequately account
> for niche but critical projects with naturally low download counts.
> 
> 2. *Time sensitivity.* Download counts do not necessarily reflect a project's
> current status or importance. A previously popular project might have low
> recent downloads but still be crucial for maintaining older systems.
> 
> 3. *Technical complexity.* Accessing the download count of a project within
> PyPI is not straightforward, and there is limited possibility to gather a
> project download statistics from mirrors or other distributions systems.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. *Ecosystem diversity.* The Python ecosystem includes projects with widely
   varying usage patterns. A fixed download threshold would not adequately account
   for niche but critical projects with naturally low download counts.

2. *Time sensitivity.* Download counts do not necessarily reflect a project's
   current status or importance. A previously popular project might have low
   recent downloads but still be crucial for maintaining older systems.

3. *Technical complexity.* Accessing the download count of a project within
   PyPI is not straightforward, and there is limited possibility to gather a
   project download statistics from mirrors or other distributions systems.
```
